Africa Alphabet

The Africa Alphabet (also International African Alphabet or IAI alphabet) is a set of letters designed as the basis for Latin alphabets for the languages of Africa. It was initially developed in 1928 by the International Institute of African Languages and Cultures from a combination of the English alphabet and the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA). Development was assisted by native speakers of African languages and led by Diedrich Hermann Westermann, who served as director of the organization from 1926 to 1939. The aim of the International Institute of African Languages and Cultures, later renamed the International African Institute (IAI), was to enable people to write for practical and scientific purposes in all African languages without the need of diacritics.

The Africa Alphabet influenced the development of orthographies of many African languages, serving "as the basis for the transcription" of about 60 by one count. Discussion of how to harmonize these with other systems led to several largely abortive proposals such as the African reference alphabet and the World Orthography.

Overview
The Africa Alphabet was built from the consonant letters of the English alphabet and the vowel letters, and any additional consonants, of the IPA. Capital forms of IPA letters were invented as necessary. Thus J and Y are pronounced  and  as in English, while Ɔ, Ɛ and Ŋ are pronounced ,  and  as in the IPA.

Characters

See also
African reference alphabet
Latin-script alphabet
Dinka alphabet
ISO 6438
Pan-Nigerian alphabet
Standard Alphabet by Lepsius
Writing systems of Africa

Notes

References
Coulmas, Florian, The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Writing Systems, 1996, Blackwell, Oxford
IIACL, Practical Orthography of African Languages, Revised Edition, London: Oxford University Press, 1930
Sow, Alfa I., and Mohamed H. Abdulaziz, "Language and Social Change," Ch. 18 in Ali A. Mazrui (ed.) Africa Since 1935 (UNESCO General History of Africa, Vol. 8). University of California Press, 1993.

Latin alphabets
Writing systems of Africa
Writing systems introduced in 1928
Orthography